# What the hell is an "ipc"?
### 12/6/2025
---

Many people often wonder why I use swayfx over something objectively better like niri or Hyprland. The answer is simple, ~~I'm too lazy to switch~~ Hyprland is too popular, and niri's ipc has a long way to go.

But what the hell do I mean by "ipc"?

"Interprocess communication (ipc) and refers to the mechanism by which different programs (or processes) on a computer can communicate and exchange data with each other." - Google

When I use the term "ipc", I am refering to the means of communication between my window manager/compositor and any other program I use or write.

Different window managers/compositors provide different ways of communication between the programs and itself, some are easy to use, some are powerful, and some simply just don't exist.

In the context of creating widgets or a shell, communication between your widgets and window manager play a big part in making a good desktop. Having a workspace indicator or dock sells the illusion that your window manager and shell is one of the same, which is why having a way to communication with your window manager is so important.

But if ipcs are so important, why isn't anyone talking about it?

Truth is, most ricers won't ever have to touch an ipc since the tools they use already do this for them


- Extended Window Manager Hints (EWMH) provide guidelines for X11 window managers, enabling tools like polybar to get workspace information from any X11 window managers
- Tools like waybar already deal with the dirty work of communicating with the compositor, so they already have support for workspace indicators and other stuff
- Awesomewm provides a widget system with full access everything the window manager has to offer
- Widget systems like Astal has libraries to communicate with your respective compositor

For the sprinkle of users that use tools that doesn't provide ipc support, they will have to connect their shell with the window manager manually.</p>

## I3ipc

I've mentioned many times that i3's ipc is one of if not the best, I've also dedicated a chunk of my time making projects to show just how much you can truly do with just the ipc. Basically, I've dedicated half of my ricing career implicitly shilling and advertising sway and it's potential, but now that people actually believe me, I'm gonna talk about how mid i3ipc actually is.

No, i3ipc isn't compiz, it does not allow for crazy desktop effects or custom animations. Here's a quick summary of what it actually provides


- Window manager information
- Configure the i3/sway at run time


In terms of window manager information, it provides pretty much everything there is to know about the state of the window manager, everything from outputs to windows. In terms of controlling the window manager, you're limited to the things you can do in the config file. The general rule of thumb with i3ipc is that an operation is possible with the ipc if and only if it's possible in the config file.

I feel the need to point out the limitation of i3ipc because I feel as if I've convinced others to view it as a tool that can make your dreams come true, when in reality it just another way to control window manager. However, That's not to say i3ipc isn't a good tool. As a ricer, my baseline for a "good" ipc is if it can successfully provide the information I need for my widget, and i3ipc passes flawlessly.


